---
title: "Finding Agreement (2016 Election Pt 3)"
author: "xkrieg"
date: "December 23, 2016"
---

On the previous post, I discussed ways in which we can unplug from our
own stories. Once we have the perspective that our mind and the mind of
another person has bought into a story that tends to conflict, I think
we are better able to look for similarities in the two narratives.

One difficulty is that we often start from the point of comparison. We
are actively looking for differences in which to critique rather than
similarities in which to unite. By unplugging from our own stories, we
gain enough perspective to direct our attention to what would be most
valuable outcome of the conversation. We can start to search for
similarities rather than differences in the narratives.

This requires quite a bit of creativity and the ability to think on
multiple levels. These levels are as follows:

-   Content
-   Logic
-   Emotion
-   Values

As you might be able to guess, these are ordered from topical to deep.
It doesn’t take too much thinking in order to compare the content of two
stories and find if they overlap at any point. Actually, machines can do
this type of content analysis just as well as and [alongside
people.](https://www.google.co.jp/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwjkysWVh4nRAhXBy7wKHWTxA0kQFggoMAE&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.ideals.illinois.edu%2Fbitstream%2Fhandle%2F2142%2F47333%2F399_ready.pdf%3Fsequence%3D2&usg=AFQjCNGypBK31ARPpOHtz8wjjkwOoDIpJg&sig2=0D7IlNn9dJxa3NoGRFWUSQ&bvm=bv.142059868,d.dGc)
An example of connecting over similar content would be the two nominees
stance on the [Middle
East.](http://www.dailydot.com/layer8/clinton-trump-foreign-policy/)
Against popular belief, they were fairly consistent with one another,
with statements, policies, and proposed actions overlapping by about
70%.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](http://www.dcs.gla.ac.uk/vincia/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/click1.jpg)

Logic is a bit more difficult to analyze in a quick and easy manner
because it has to do with the underlying thought process behind what
someone is saying. This often contains a [premise and a
conclusion.](https://people.umass.edu/klement/100/logic.html)

`IF X equals Y (premise) THEN Y equals X (conclusion)`

A larger narratives from voters on both sides of the 2016 election was a
story about “lesser of two evils.” Both sides were engaging in logic
that was similar to this:

`IF I do not really like my candidate (premise) BUT the other candidate
is worse (premise) THEN I will be sure to vote for my candidate`

That is the “lesser of two evils” logic in which many Republicans and
Democrats were engaging. Although it is a more complex logical
statement, and one might not agree with the content of the premise,
acknowledging that the conclusion logically follows their beliefs can
build far more bridges than jumping in with a “what are you thinking?!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/originals/61/7a/6a/617a6aac5c65dd75c275f5f70ed316ff.jpg)

Next is emotion. The 2016 Election was a very emotional event for so
many people on both sides. Stopping and acknowledging the very strong
emotions that came up out of this event is a good way to work through a
different story. Maybe this would work as a statement like this: “Wasn’t
it really amazing to see what type of emotions appeared and how strong
they were. I feel like all of us were riding some crazy roller coaster
for two years. What was that like for you?"

Being able to say to someone engaged a different story, “Yeah, I felt
angry too” can work to unite two people in a very powerful way.

I had an experience like this with a Trump-supporter that was really
upset with a narrative proposed by some Democrats equating Trump
supporters to white supremacists simply for voting Trump. This
individual strongly resented that type of story and did not want to be
associated with groups such as the KKK by other people. My response was
the following:

“Wow. Yeah. I get it. I am a white guy from Michigan, and I *really* don’t
want to be associated with white supremism either. I would feel
absolutely awful—in so many ways—if someone were saying that about me."

We were able to join in that emotion of pain and disgust about someone
associating us with a movement that we believe is absolutely evil. We
were able to connect over that feeling.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](http://www.thecrewcoach.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/values_1.png)

Finally, we have values. Identifying the values that underly other’s
narratives probably requires the most practice. In fact, the first step
would be learning how to identify the values that you use to guide your
life. Once you get in the habit of identifying your own values, all of a
sudden other people’s values will not seem so hidden. Actually, one of
the big turning points for me (and the inspiration to write these blog
posts) came when I was really able to connect with someone who leaned
far right over the values of love and commitment for those around them.
Love and commitment are “superordinate” values for me, and seeing them
alive and well (though practiced differently) in this person who was on
the other side of the political spectrum was a really meaningful
experience.

In Acceptance Commitment Therapy, we typically use a worksheet to help
people think about their values. If you are interested, you can find one
version
[here](https://www.google.co.jp/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&ved=0ahUKEwiLqcWeiInRAhWCxLwKHZMVB7IQFggpMAI&url=http%3A%2F%2Fmedia.psychology.tools%2Fworksheets%2Fenglish_us%2Fvalues_en-us.pdf&usg=AFQjCNHVqIDiaxZwWNVpnSW6IYJFAyxZXQ&sig2=YPXLVjYYcUjl8LZyqYWGng)
and another version
[here](http://www.thehappinesstrap.com/upimages/Values_Questionnaire.pdf).

Next post will be about inviting people to share your story. Talk to you
then.
