---
title: "Unplugging from our Own Stories (2016 Election Pt 2)"
author: "xkrieg"
layout: post
date: "November 28, 2016"
output: md_document
---

Have you ever “lost yourself” in a really good movie or a good book?
Maybe in this situation, you felt that you were experiencing the same
emotions and thoughts as the characters. Maybe you lost track of time
and looked up to find that, without knowing it, you read through the
entire night and the sun was now rising--I’ve been there. Our minds love
getting lost in a good story. We love being wrapped up in a compelling
narrative.

That is because our minds are the best story-tellers of all.

Think about it though. When you were watching “Return of the King” (Lord
of the Rings series) with wide eyes and a captivated mind, were you
really storming the gates of Mordor alongside Aragorn? In reality, you
were likely sitting in a dark theatre amongst a hundred strangers, and
probably failed to realize that all of the crunching of the popcorn had
momentarily stopped. Or maybe you were at home, sitting on your
comfortable sofa. Although your mind is in a grey, dystopian world
bravely fending off the final wave of orcs threatening your home and
people, it might be a nice, sunny Saturday afternoon.

![](http://sites.psu.edu/cmk5684/wp-content/uploads/sites/15806/2014/10/Return71.jpg)

You may have failed to notice the warmth of the sunbeams flowing into
your living room, the chirping of the birds outside, the softness of the
couch beneath you, the quickening of your breath as your mind is drawn
into the suspense, or how sore your muscles are getting for sitting
through a 4 hour movie. Your mind was so plugged in to Tolkien’s epic
narrative, that you may have temporarily forgot who you are, where you
are, or what time it is.

Can you imagine how strange it would be for someone to sit there and
watch you watch a movie, but being unable to see the movie itself. Your
behavior would be very strange, because the ‘you' that they are
observing is so far separated from the ‘you' that you are experiencing
in your mind.

![](http://media.gettyimages.com/videos/teenage-girl-watching-movie-at-home-lamy-new-mexico-usa-video-id97939510?s=640x640)

When we are captured by a compelling story, we often lose sight of our
experience in the present moment. We lose track of the sensory
experience of 'me being me’--right here, right now.

This may seem like an excessively long introduction to talk about ways
to engage people with a different perspective regarding the 2016
Election. However, I really think that understanding how our mind “buys
in” to stories is the first place to start when trying to communicate
with someone who has bought into a different story than you have. You
may have read an upsetting story about what those horrible Democrats (or
Republicans) have done to undermine the very idea of what it is to 'be
American’ and completely forgotten that your actual perceptual
experience is sitting in front of your computer, or lying in bed looking
at your phone, buying into the story that you are reading.

Is the story true? Our brains tend to think whatever they are engaged
with is “true”. We are the master story-tellers, and are so terribly
good at convincing ourselves [(Illusory Truth
Effect)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illusory_truth_effect).

![](http://blog.yaware.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/blindspot.jpg)

Sometimes, it is good to "stop and smell the roses,” to spend a moment
just “being” and acknowledging who you are, where you are, “when” you
are, and the exact sensory experience you are undergoing in that moment.
Who knew a cellphone screen is actually such a harsh light against the
back of your eyes?! Not many people stop to look.

Once we unplug for a moment and see the “I” in the “here” and “now”, I
think it is so much easier to see someone else (“you") in the “there”
and “then.” “I, here, now” is intrinsically related to “you, there,
then." These key nodes represent what is called a
[diectic](https://relationalframetheory.wikispaces.com/Deictic+relations),
which is a core concept in one of the grand theories of [language and
cognition](https://www.amazon.com/Relational-Frame-Theory-Post-Skinnerian-Cognition/dp/1475775210/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1480337928&sr=8-2&keywords=hayes+relational+frame+theory),
as well as core to several therapeutic practices [(ACT,
MBCT)](https://www.google.co.jp/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwjY0uC5t8rQAhWIebwKHbdHB3oQFggbMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.reachcambridge.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2Fproviding-a-rationale-on-different-treatments.pdf&usg=AFQjCNEs96E6B977xuP9TcsZSSbptY6_Yw&sig2=loAk8gcG0YnrM5hq02I5Bw&bvm=bv.139782543,d.dGc).

“Wow, I can’t believe how quickly I felt a surge of emotions of
disbelief, distress, anger, and hurt, when I read that
politically-charged news article on Facebook about Trump’s new cabinet
appointment. I wonder if that is how Aunt Christine felt each time
something showed up on Fox News about the Clinton Foundation. It’s so
funny, because both of us were really just sitting there and became so
enamored by the story we were seeing. We may have both experienced our
minds telling us that what we were mentally involved with was ’so true’
or ’so wrong’. Maybe we have a lot more in common than I thought."

That sounds like a start of a better type of "listening conversation"
with someone who holds a different set of stories.

In this post, I discussed how to improve listening by recognizing and
“unplugging" from our own stories. I plan on following this up with
ideas on how to (2.) find at least three things to agree with, and (3.)
inviting someone to share your story with you.

Looking forward to sharing with you then.
