---
title: "Tale of a Thousand Stories (2016 Election Pt 1)"
author: "Xander Krieg"
date: "November 23, 2016"
---

Some have stated that the 2016 election has been the most polarizing
political event in modern American
[history.](http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/why-the-2016-election-will-be-one-of-the-most-pivotal-moments-of-our-time-20151203)
Empirically, the country has become more and more bipartisan, with
people who were previously moderate more consistently ascribing to
either the Republican or Democrat party in both [casting their
ballots](http://www.people-press.org/2014/06/12/political-polarization-in-the-american-public/)
and developing their [world
view.](https://news.uchicago.edu/article/2012/11/09/partisanship-shapes-beliefs-about-political-and-non-political-issues)

Forgive the tautology, but I think it is fairly safe to argue that both
radical conservatism and radical liberalism are, well, radical. This
leads us to the question of *how* people radicalize. In a fascinating
simulation study by Jager and Amblard
[(2004)](http://www.rug.nl/staff/w.jager/jager_amblard_cmot_2004.pdf),
they showed that it is increased contact (especially when it is slow and
progressive) with individuals that are just slightly more polarized than
you are what leads to shifts in population-wide extreme beliefs,
especially when ego-involvement is high and non-committement (apathy) is
low. According to their model, this is on the timescale of months or
years, but can happen even when even a very small minority of the
population holds extreme views. I think it is fair to say that in the
U.S., we probably have over 10% of conservatives and 10% of liberals
that hold an extreme ideology related to their political orientation.

Furthermore, the internet has only exacerbated the human tendency to
associate with like-minded individuals, by providing elements like
politically-slanted [news
outlets](http://www.businessinsider.com/here-are-the-most-and-least-trusted-news-outlets-in-america-2014-10),
Facebook pages that re-post certain stories but not others, and the
option to “not follow” those who believe differently [(7% of Facebook
Users Defriended Someone Due to 2016
Election)](http://www.chicagotribune.com/lifestyles/ct-facebook-election-reaction-family-1109-20161109-story.html).
Repeated contact with like-minded individuals creates a sort of
echo-chamber [(also called groupthink in social
psychology)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Groupthink), where stories
are sorted and aggregated to form a larger narrative. The more stories
collected the stronger the narrative gets. The more extreme the story,
the better.

![](http://static3.businessinsider.com/image/5446619369bedd2b5b3ecd67-800-/pj_14.10.21_mediapolarization-01.png)

For me, this election culminated into a “tale of a thousand stories”,
where the political discourse from both sides was fueled by the
narrative-consistent stories propagated in these online echo-chambers.
Sometimes the same facts were used, but interpreted differently. Other
times, different sets of facts were pitted against each other. And
ultimately, when there was not a timely narrative-consistent story
readily available, stories were [intentionally
fabricated](http://www.vox.com/new-money/2016/11/16/13659840/facebook-fake-news-chart)
to keep the narrative alive and well. It also ensured that the
narrative-holders happy and confident with their beliefs. This last one
is perhaps the most disturbing. We all saw (bogus) headlines like ["An
FBI agent suspected in Clinton's email leaks found dead in an apparent
murder-suicide"](http://www.snopes.com/fbi-agent-murder-suicide/) or
["Donald Trump was born in
Pakistan"](http://www.snopes.com/donald-trump-was-born-in-pakistan/),
and the line between a reliable news report and partisan propaganda
became dangerously thin.

![](https://cdn0.vox-cdn.com/thumbor/OidoJL7Wrepqrdg0mdByOrhYv4M=/1600x0/filters:no_upscale()/cdn0.vox-cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/7484977/sub_buzz_441_1479332078_1.png)

Another investigation that compared the Facebook feeds of people who
leaned right and those who leaned left [(Blue Feed, Red
Feed.)](http://graphics.wsj.com/blue-feed-red-feed/) The text, websites,
news clippings, and videos were *radically* different. The stories
shared reflected the overall narrative that one ascribed to rather than
a mixed portion of narrative-consistent and narrative-inconsistent
information that more likely reflects a more accurate picture of
reality. Information is power. And people will fight for control of that
information.

This year's “Tale of a Thousand Stories” was more of an information war
that pitted stories, facts, and ultimately people against each other.
Being exposed to only certain stories that are consistent with the
narratives that we hold, leave us unable to communicate with those who
hold a different set of stories. I lean left, and I remember being so
surprised watching a television interview (on Fox News) where a Michigan
farmer shared how he felt ignored and neglected by the current
administration, which was taking the country in a direction that did not
reflect his small-town values. I was more than ready to have a
conversation about social justice or racism, but I was completely
unprepared to talk about the experience of living in the countryside and
feeling ignored and voiceless.

Given the discourse that I hear between opposing narrative-holders, it
seems like we have forgotten how to listen. In my next few posts, I
would like to discuss how to improve listening by

1.  “Unplugging" from our own stories
2.  Finding at least three things to agree with in an opposing story
3.  Inviting someone to share your story with you

I believe that the United States truly is better together, and for that
we will all need to lend a listening ear to our neighbor.

I will also discuss (1.) scientific ways to evaluate stories, as well as
(2.) "when a story is not just a story”--referring to the violence some
stories inspire (on both sides).

Please stay-tuned.
