---
title: "Inviting People to Share Your Story (2016 Election Pt 4)"
author: "xkrieg"
date: "January 08, 2017"
---

On the previous post, I discussed ways in which we can find agreement
with people who may be engaging in different narratives than the one we
hold. After connecting with others over the content, logic, emotion, or
values related to their story, they are typically more interested (than
before) to engage in a narrative that you might hold. After building a
bridge, we have the opportunity to cross it to visit someone else’s
perspective, invite them to come over and see ours, or peacefully meet
in the middle. How do we facilitate this type of conversation?

In most blog posts, I typically have three or four points on how to do
something, but this time I just have one:

**ASK FOR PERMISSION**

After we have set the stage by generating our own insight on (1.) how
people (ourselves included) [fuse with a given
narrative](https://xkrieg.github.io/Election02/), (2.) how access to
these narratives are [highly influenced by political
ideology](https://xkrieg.github.io/Election01/), and (3.) have taken
active steps to [forge a
connection](https://xkrieg.github.io/Election03/) with someone who
thinks differently, the rest of the conversation is quite simple.

“Would it be okay if I show you just a little bit of the narrative that
I follow?”
“Would you be willing to listen if I shared just a bit
about where I am coming from?”
“I can see that you have a very strong
association between X and Y. Would it be possible for us to talk about a
hypothetical example?”

Almost always, the other person answers “yes” or “okay” or “fine.” By
doing this, we have received their permission to share and increased
their willingness to hear us out.

![](http://erikkillian.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/permission.jpg)

Here is an example:

**A**: “I think a lot of people associate immigration with a more
competitive job market and reduced wages. Would it be okay if I share a
little bit about the way I think about immigration?” **B**: “Yeah, sure”
**A**: “My mind associates immigration with family. I can’t help but
think of someone’s grandma in the Philippines or in rural Mexico
dreaming of the day that she could meet her grandchildren. She had
applied for a visa again and again but was denied each time. I've worked
with families that said goodbye to their parents thirty years ago and
could not risk their visa status to even go back to bury them. I know of
children who have been deported simply because they are of Mexican
heritage and their parents lost their birth certificate. I really
believe in 'family first,' and I want to do my part to push for policies
that keep people together, while still respecting the sovereignty of a
nationstate.” **B**: “I get that, and families should stay together. But
people should immigrate legally…"

In that last statement, **A** had shared the story of “immigration is
about family” with **B**, and **B** joined with the story (albeit took
it in a different direction afterwards). **B** agree with **A** on an
important tenet of **A**’s story.

That is not insignificant.

People have a tendency to [commit to the answers that they
give](https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/let-their-words-do-the-talking/201212/get-things-done-get-verbal-commitment).
If **B** said “yeah” to **A**’s request to share, s/he is more likely to
listen receptively to **A** as compared to if s/he said “no”, nothing,
or wasn’t given a choice at all.

In American culture, many people do not like asking for permission. We
even have phrases like “If I don’t ask, they can’t say ‘no’” or “It is
easier to ask for forgiveness than to ask for permission.” The
interesting thing is, although people are hesitant to ask for
permission, people say ‘yes’ to some very crazy things. Some of you may
know about Jia Jiang, who spent two years asking people crazy things
just so he could get over his fear of rejection. The [craziest thing
about his
experience](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-01-07/rejection-therapy-a-hundred-days-of-no),
though, was how many people *actually said yes*.

In order to effectively share your story to someone who ascribes to a
different narrative, set the stage with a good understanding, strong
connection, and a request for permission.

The last post in this series will be about when stories are no longer
“just stories”, but invade people’s physical realities. I am looking
forward to talking with you then.
